Sumit Gulwani: Can I please repeat?
Sadra Sabouri: I, I said, can I, can I start the recording? Okay.
Sumit Gulwani: Yes, yes, that's great, yes.
Sadra Sabouri: So we can start now, it's okay?
Sumit Gulwani: Sounds good, yes.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay, let me share the…
Sadra Sabouri: PowerPoint, or the slightest we want to work on. The…
Sadra Sabouri: points that we already covered in the email, I'm not gonna go through them deeply, but these were the challenges that we,
Sadra Sabouri: were hypothesizing, and the design goals that we were trying to answer with, and the design schema that's sent to you. We decided to start
Sadra Sabouri: the first, formative study slash participatory design with these two main challenges, high cognitive load and the tracking, changes challenge.
Sadra Sabouri: And then for these two challenges.
Sadra Sabouri: implement the two core main features, the step-by-step reveal and the granular feedback on edit. And then based on that, two main features, we… we had had that, YouTube… we had that onboarding, video, and,
Sadra Sabouri: the… participatory design, study. So we conducted 8 of them, and we used a simplified task of…
Sumit Gulwani: Shada, can you please go back to the previous slide? And maybe this probably has that. So the two things that we studied were around step-by-step review and grammar feedback.
Sadra Sabouri: Yes.
Sumit Gulwani: And the C1 and C3 are referring to the challenges that these solutions addressed.
Sumit Gulwani: And so, tracking the open changes…
Sumit Gulwani: Okay? And why do you call it granular feedback?
Sadra Sabouri: Because it's, like, feedback on… A specific step.
Sumit Gulwani: I see. So the term that is being used around, which you might want to think about, is steerability.
Sumit Gulwani: So the user is not just giving feedback. Feedback is more used for
Sumit Gulwani: people whom we pay to gather some data on the output of an agent. So they are providing us feedback on how good the agent is. But here, we have a user who's trying to accomplish a task.
Sumit Gulwani: And they want to steer the output in the direction that they would like.
Sadra Sabouri: I think this is… Better term.
Sadra Sabouri: I think so, yeah. I think that this term comes better with the grafting as well, like, changing the branch and things.
Sumit Gulwani: Yeah, so the step-by- again, I understand that things are moving fast, and I have a tendency to, you know, talk about lots of ideas, some of which, you know, can be distracting as well, so I like your attitude of fixing something, you know, going the end-to-end route there, and I encourage you to do that.
Sumit Gulwani: However, whatever we decide to write in the paper, we need to make sure we claim the broader space in some part of the paper, or if possible, even as part of the study itself.
Sumit Gulwani: So, the big idea, the big, big idea is not a step-by-step reveal. It is just one very important manifestation of the big idea, but I would say the big idea that we should claim, which will apply to any kind of agent.
Sumit Gulwani: is… Providing different kinds of views.
Sumit Gulwani: into the output of the agent. So that's the biggest idea, right? We want to provide different kind of views in the output of the agent.
Sumit Gulwani: One such view is this step-by-step reveal.
Sumit Gulwani: Another such view would be to show the entire thing as a DAG, where each card actually talks about each step that the agent did.
Sumit Gulwani: Yet another view might be a Q&A session that gets spun off with the user. Or who knows, there might be different kinds of views, or for different kinds of domains, the views might be very different. For instance, I might want to think about
Sumit Gulwani: let's say only, core correctness. So I don't care about any of the steps, I just care about the formulas. I don't care about what visualizations were done, and so on. I just want to make sure computations were actually correct. The numbers were correctly computed, as opposed to whether they were rendered correctly or not.
Sumit Gulwani: And that's the view I want. I just want to be able to look at formulas. Or I might want to say, aha, you know, I have seen that the system makes, you know, off-by-one errors, or…
Sumit Gulwani: There can be this confusion around understanding the currency of the numbers.
Sumit Gulwani: So let's… give me a view that just, you know, works, you know, whatever the agent ended up doing in that sense, right? So the moment you take this idea about creating different views, custom views, you know, the views will depend upon, of course, the output
Sumit Gulwani: task, or the domain of tasks. Also, it may depend upon the kind of user, or the curiosity the user has at that point of time, right? Once you broaden your mindset here, you will get tons of ideas, and that's what we would absolutely love to actually claim. But of course, the focus should be on one thing that we get to evaluate, so that we get a paper out. But let's just make sure what forum would it be? Maybe this paper, another paper, or something, but let's not leave sight of this biggest idea that what we are really doing is
Sumit Gulwani: We are helping create different views on the output of the agent.
Sadra Sabouri: And when you say view, this is, like, the analogy of, like, database view, right? Like, the view… Yes, yes.
Sumit Gulwani: Yes, yes. Okay, so good, good, good, good point there, yeah.
Sadra Sabouri: So yeah, having these two, let's say.
Sumit Gulwani: So let me just give you another example, right? So I end up, you know, working all of this, you know, with this Cloud CLI, you know, making some kind of app, and so on. I have absolutely no clue, you know, what has really happened. So I'm in the middle of an interactive process. So right now, you are studying tasks which are one-shot.
Sumit Gulwani: Okay? But the real tasks will be interactive. Those tasks will be running for 4 days, running for, you know, months. So let's say my task is to work with a coding agent to write code. That's my task.
Sumit Gulwani: The agent is not a spreadsheet agent, it's a coding agent. By the way, spreadsheet agent is also a coding agent, right? But let's say I'm working with a coding agent.
Sumit Gulwani: What does the output of the coding agent mean?
Sumit Gulwani: Is it the code that has been synthesized?
Sadra Sabouri: Or the product.
Sumit Gulwani: Well, we are braving towards a future where people will not even be looking at the code.
Sumit Gulwani: What would they be looking at?
Sadra Sabouri: To pour that.
Sumit Gulwani: That's the view I'm talking about. Different kinds of views into the
Sumit Gulwani: working of the agent. And these views are not just about One shot and task done.
Sumit Gulwani: The goal of these views is to steer the process. The process may not even be finished, it might just have been started.
Sumit Gulwani: So that's why the second aspect is very important. What do we make it… what do we do to make it stable? But again, these are very, you know, big generalizations, we'll get to it later, but just keep those… these two things in your mind, right? We want to provide the users the right view.
Sumit Gulwani: And we want them to steer the thing forward.
Sumit Gulwani: But of course, we should start simple, more focused, so that we can write a paper, and don't lose focus here. Okay, please continue.
Sadra Sabouri: So yeah, having these two main features, we…
Sadra Sabouri: conducted the participatory design slash formative study, for achieving two goals. First, to verify that the features that we already implemented are good and are, accepted for user, and then to develop more, design goals.
Sadra Sabouri: the mentioned challenges… so, the feedback that we got from users was that they liked the supplier, and they thought that it made them understand the process better. And then, for the edit mechanism, they also felt more…
Sadra Sabouri: Felt they have more, granular, control over the,
Sadra Sabouri: Process for steering the process more frequently and more precisely.
Sadra Sabouri: They mentioned some challenges. One of them was that they wanted to know how the rationalization behind each step works, which is something that we expected. So for that, we have the ask feature, we have the preloaded QA answers, and most of them was about formula, so the preloaded.
Sumit Gulwani: So, wow! So you figure out… so the idea that we already had the idea of ask, but now what you have already validated is its even importance and need without even putting this in front of them?
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, yeah, exactly. And there was another need of, like, exploring alternatives. Again, this is something that we had in mind, for…
Sadra Sabouri: heavy alternatives and DAGs, and this last one wasn't mentioned, frequently, but, like, was mentioned twice, once or twice. That's, like, the need for having
Sadra Sabouri: knowing unknowns, unknowns, unknown unknowns, which is the need for rubric. I'm not 100% sure for this, but this is, like, something that we can,
Sumit Gulwani: Yes, actually, this is very smart, you know, cognitive, you know, metacognitive strategy here. I, myself, do not use this as much, because I feel like I'm always in a rush and I know everything, right? I need to, you know… because I would… when I use the system as a thought partner.
Sumit Gulwani: So I… so recently, you probably have seen how I started using it, right? So I… you sent me an email, I think about it.
Sumit Gulwani: And I promise you, all those responses are mine, even though I let it run by the agent to, you know, clean up my response, right? But all the ideas are mine.
Sumit Gulwani: But then, I actually run the agent, and I say, provide a critique on this, and then without making any changes, I just copy-paste the critique, you know, to you. So I've started using the… using the agent as a thought partner here. But I do feel
Sumit Gulwani: that agents are… especially ChatGPT is going to be very biased. I'm not using ChatGPT Claude here, but ChatGPT tends to be, you know, very biased and flattering, and these things are probably by design, because they want these things to become addictive.
Sumit Gulwani: We have no idea, you know, what all these companies are actually doing, but this is a suspicion that many have.
Sumit Gulwani: So, one interesting aspect of using it as a thought partner is to, you know, along the lines of what you were saying, you know, asking is, okay, what is something that I may not have even thought about?
Sumit Gulwani: Or what do you think, you know, we don't even know? So I feel you are taking it one level even ahead, right? So my strategy is for it to critique, you know, my thinking or my output.
Sumit Gulwani: But what you are saying here is that some people are already talking about the need to even, go beyond.
Sadra Sabouri: Yep.
Sumit Gulwani: And it would be interesting to actually see, do some experiments, and this is something that you can do on your own as well, you don't need a user study here, that when you run through some kinds of tasks.
Sumit Gulwani: If this third bucket
Sumit Gulwani: gives you something more, something different, something richer than the first two things, right? So what are the first two things? The first two things can be edit or ask, and suggestions there.
Sadra Sabouri: Yo.
Sumit Gulwani: So you ask the model, say, okay, what would be some edit suggestions, or what would be some ask suggestions, right? So that's one thing, right? But the way I interpret the third sub-bullet is we are doing one more meta-order thinking and trying to get the system out of the box.
Sumit Gulwani: And this is a study that you might be able to do on your own, to see that
Sumit Gulwani: Oh, you use the agent to do edit or ask suggestions, so that's one. After having done that, you are now asked the agent in a fresh session. Don't bias the context of the conversation about this question. Oh, what might be missing? What have you not, you know, taken account and things? And see if you get any interesting outputs here. And depending upon what you find, this may or may not be a feature of the tool. But otherwise, it's a very easy thing to implement, right? You just give one more suggestion.
Sumit Gulwani: Or what have none of us, you know, thought about or considered, or what are the unknown unknowns?
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, and I tried it just, like, for myself a little bit when I was implementing it.
Sadra Sabouri: maybe I wasn't using the state-of-art model, but, the unknown unknowns that I was coming up with, was…
Sadra Sabouri: much better than the ones that the AI was coming up with. For example, let me show you the task that we used for the study. The task was to, like, you have a warehouse, and,
Sadra Sabouri: Something like this.
Sadra Sabouri: like, items, coffee beans, you have this, current stock, you have this, average daily sales. And then we ask them to, come up with,
Sadra Sabouri: the total cost of your buying items for next… for ensuring that you're not running out of stock for next 7 days, and we gave them some subtasks. My questions to them, as one of the unknown unknowns, was that
Sadra Sabouri: what about inflation? Like, if you… 7 days is, like, not enough respect for inflation in U.S. contexts, but for some countries, even 7 days, the inflation can affect. So some of these, like, implicit assumptions.
Sadra Sabouri: That was, interesting to, to, no? Llms…
Sadra Sabouri: like, when I was trying this with LLMs, they always come up with some, like, very, surface-level, items.
Sumit Gulwani: Maybe a couple of thoughts there.
Sumit Gulwani: So what is that these models are going to continue to become better, and you need to ride the wave of advances, so keep trying this experiment, right? Even if it does not work, does not mean to not work tomorrow, try it tomorrow, next model comes, try it again, and so on. In fact, you can make… use this as one of your small diary.
Sumit Gulwani: of things to try whenever any new model release happens. So when new model release happens, like, at least inside Microsoft, you know, there's a fire drill that starts happening. Okay, okay, so, you know, go and study, you know, what these models are capable of doing.
Sumit Gulwani: And you can do the same thing yourself on your diary of tasks. Tasks that you know are hard, which current models are not able to do. So that's one.
Sumit Gulwani: The second thing I would say is.
Sumit Gulwani: that we can stay more humble, continue to stay more humble. Maybe we just didn't ask the model the things properly. Maybe, maybe there is a way of asking it, so that we get more interesting, outputs. So keep trying, keep innovating on that, keep trying on that.
Sumit Gulwani: And one way that you can iterate on that is
Sumit Gulwani: to use the agent itself, right? So you set up an agent whose goal would be to help you come up with the right meta-prompt here. That's your goal, right? To help come up with the right prompt for figuring out unknown unknowns. That's your goal.
Sumit Gulwani: But you don't try to…
Sumit Gulwani: do the… write the prompt, you know, yourself. That's the goal of your agent. That's your combined goal with the agent. What you communicate to this agent are your experiences. So you say, look, there was this task.
Sumit Gulwani: I think inflation is an interesting unknown unknown, which the model did not come up with through. In fact, what it is giving me are very surface-level things. What do you think? How can we refine the prompt so that we can elicit, you know, better output?
Sumit Gulwani: Or maybe you have more examples like this, more case studies like this, right? So this is your programming environment of the future.
Sumit Gulwani: This is your programming environment of the future to write the New code or new prompt.
Sumit Gulwani: So your goal is to figure out… so again, I'm assuming here, so I'm making an assumption here. I'm making an assumption that models are always already good enough, we just don't know how to ask them.
Sumit Gulwani: If that be the case.
Sumit Gulwani: then you need a systematic way to explore this. And I'm trying to tell you that way of how you can manage that thing. And I will always remain humble, like, I'm not sure if you folks have seen this talk, probably not. No, no, I didn't… no, this was a different content.
Sumit Gulwani: So I'll send you a link to a… link to a deck, which is a talk I gave in Germany.
Sumit Gulwani: It is a little bit old, but I think still the lessons are quite true. You'll be amazed at how interesting output you can get
Sumit Gulwani: out of models by just asking them, providing the right interesting instruction. And my… a lot of my inspiration comes from human sciences.
Sumit Gulwani: maybe I shared this with you, I do not know, but I will try to send a link again to this document, right? So, in that sense, what I'm saying is.
Sumit Gulwani: Do both things. Maintain a diary, keep trying out new model releases. Also, set up an agent. We can call it, you know, whatever agent, right? Because it's a mix of, you know, it can be code or prompt and so on, where you keep sharing your observations, and you keep coming up with the refinement.
Sumit Gulwani: Because if this idea succeeds, it's going to be a big thing, right? Like, some of those big ideas have been, like, you know, one-liners that have really shaped the community.
Sumit Gulwani: Like, my favorite is, you know, think step by step, right? That was a one-liner. It completely changed the community. I feel this idea of unknown unknowns
Sumit Gulwani: And using the model as a thought partner, I feel, is also quite big.
Sumit Gulwani: But maybe you're not seeing success here, so I would just say, you know, keep… keep on it. I think it's a big enough idea to invest some… something into it.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, you're right.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, having these new features, some of them will be already implemented, I think all of them are already implemented, I will complete the research prototype, and we will conduct the summative study.
Sadra Sabouri: some of the challenges that I foresee
Sadra Sabouri: coming. One of them was Models earlier.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Sadra, can I, interrupt? So, there was another feature on…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Making, characteristics visible on the…
Sadra Sabouri: element, right?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah.
Sadra Sabouri: no one mentioned it in the challenge, and I realized that, It's,
Sadra Sabouri: again, like, creativity of models are really, bounded there. Maybe if you switch to a more complex model, it feels better, but I was…
Sadra Sabouri: First, first, I saw that as, like, a different contribution that is a little bit out of scope for this paper. Second, I think it has more room to exploration than the time that we have until U.S.
Sumit Gulwani: So, again, I'm not sure if I fully understood. Srini, can you please repeat? What was the idea that you were sharing? What did you see?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, do you have a picture, Sandra, to pull up, and then I can tell. So the idea behind it was,
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): One way of handling this unknown unknown, or, like, giving some form of, verification, support to the users is to…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): bring out the decisions that the model has made in context to this particular step. So, if, for example, the step has made header columns.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): It took certain decisions, like it added a font color, it added a font size, it… so you can ask why the column names are these in the edit and ask place.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): And then you can look at the aesthetic, or the more, surface level, the design decisions that the model is making for you in this
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Santa Claus's affordances, but let's call it, like, characteristics, properties part of the box. So the idea was to, not just surface the content decisions, but also how it is being displayed, and the decisions.
Sumit Gulwani: Easy.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Northern Mesa.
Sumit Gulwani: Okay, so one thing that brings to my mind here is that even both these edit and ask, functionalities that we have.
Sumit Gulwani: Can also be filtered or restricted to whether the user cares about functional requirements, or aesthetic requirements, or both.
Sumit Gulwani: Because a user might say, look, you know, my goal really here is correctness, so I don't care about aesthetics right now. Or the user might know that, oh, you know, the final answer is correct, but what I need to go more into is how can I help improve the presentation of these results, you know, step by step.
Sumit Gulwani: So one part that is agreeing to me is that in either of these edit ask modes, there can be a toggle, focus on functional, focus on aesthetics, focus on both. And in fact, it goes back to the idea of the view that I was talking about, right? The user might want to define the view of what they care about.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, but it seems like, because I think we are using a much smaller model, I mean, if this was a bigger model, it probably would be very…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): like, the things they are extracting as part of the properties are quite limited, but also, no one said this in the formative study. There was no mention of…
Sadra Sabouri: no one said this. Even when I was trying to implicitly make them say this, they didn't say this.
Sumit Gulwani: Now, so one other random thing I'll say is that, you know, I'm not happy that you're using a smaller model. Whatever it takes.
Sumit Gulwani: And money should not be an issue here. Whatever it takes, you got to switch to 4.6.
Sumit Gulwani: Otherwise, it is just going to set you behind. I have experienced this, I see this all around me, and it is just time wasted to work with, you know, smaller models.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay, yeah, it's on a small model, but it's not the best model. It's Gemini 2.1.
Sumit Gulwani: Yes, yes, you know, so in that sense, yeah, yeah. Now, unless, you know, the only exception is, unless you're going after training a smaller model because you want to care about latency and so on, which is a very different use case. Right now, we are exploring the frontier of what's possible, and for this, please, please, please, whatever it takes, switch with the best possible model.
Sadra Sabouri: And one other thing I wanted to mention, the reason I said that it's… the exploration space is much bigger than what we're seeing is that it's not only focused on the… it's not only bounded by the aesthetic stuff. For example, one of the items that LLM came up with was the profit threshold. So when I… for example, when I… when you change the profit threshold from
Sadra Sabouri: 60,000 to 300, it will, Dynamically change the,
Sadra Sabouri: decision-making that you can make out of the data. So it's not only about aesthetics, it can also be about the formulas. I don't have the video here, but there was… something was, like, which API should I use for doing this?
Sadra Sabouri: That's what… that's why I'm saying, it can be explored differently.
Sadra Sabouri: And on a design that I have right now, it doesn't fit well.
Sumit Gulwani: So, Sarah, I think I lost what you were saying, right? So, you're trying to give me an example of what… so what is not so good about the affordances here, and what is your idea?
Sadra Sabouri: what is good about it is that the exploration space is much bigger than the,
Sadra Sabouri: scope of this paper, I would say.
Sadra Sabouri: a series as, like, a different contribution. This dynamically, like, automatically generated UI elements.
Sumit Gulwani: Okay, so just one advice here, we will have tons of ideas, I'm never, you know, we'll never be short on papers. Whatever you can.
Sumit Gulwani: try to write one solid paper instead of, you know, two smaller papers. That would be my advice. But unless it broadens the scope so much that you have to broaden the user study, we don't have time for it, and so on, that's a different method. But if you believe some of the ideas can just go in, rather, let's rather have, you know, one, you know, stronger paper. Because today, papers are being written just left and right.
Sumit Gulwani: Papers will be lost.
Sumit Gulwani: I wonder how many citations is each of these papers even going to get?
Sadra Sabouri: Yep, yep.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): And…
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, that's true.
Sumit Gulwani: Okay, one other thought that occurred to me as you were describing this to me was…
Sumit Gulwani: I'm eagerly waiting to get a video to share with people inside Microsoft. No rush, maybe it can take a few more days. But the two things that I would aim for are… one is definitely a view where you show us the DAG.
Sumit Gulwani: Because the step-by-step idea that I feel people inside Microsoft have also realized.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah.
Sumit Gulwani: And… but of course, you know, they're not doing their user studies along the line of what you're doing. The DAG, I don't think anyone has realized yet.
Sumit Gulwani: Yeah. So… so definitely the video that I want, you know, you should show that DAG, because you can just, you know, make up a space where you show the entire graph and so on, and the user can click inside one of them, and then you can drop them into a step-by-step view, maybe after that.
Sumit Gulwani: The other thing I would say is, you need to have a motivating and convincing example. So I do not know how convincing this example is, but an example would be convincing
Sumit Gulwani: Where the user got something done.
Sumit Gulwani: But then only by browsing this thing, they were able to steer it in interesting directions, maybe something that they even did not think about.
Sumit Gulwani: So that aha moment has to be there.
Sumit Gulwani: So, show a task, people look at it and think, yeah, you know, looks good, it doesn't look good, maybe I can go and still check it, but then you walk them through the experience, and that experience lets them find a bug, or that experience lets them get an interesting suggestion that takes it into a different direction.
Sumit Gulwani: So whatever your best example is, you know, come up with that, and that's the place where we should… how we should make the video. So the example should tell a good story, not just talk about, okay, here are the interesting features, here's how you use it. A story will be made up around the underlying, you know, very specific task that is out there.
Sumit Gulwani: So again, these are not easy to come. In fact, this is what becomes a motivating example in a paper, but it takes time.
Sumit Gulwani: But keep thinking about, about this.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, sure.
Sadra Sabouri: And, yeah, what's a DAG thing? DAG feature, which I believe would be the most important feature, as you mentioned. I'm going to use the code segments that we have, which includes
Sadra Sabouri: mainly the code that this specific step will add to your worksheet, as representation of edges, and then save that on users or local storage.
Sadra Sabouri: and then having these steps, so let me just play this as animation collecting. So when you are already committed,
Sadra Sabouri: sorry, already in a worksheet state, and you want to go to another worksheet state, applying this code segment, this is the step that we're talking about right now. And then when I edit, and you have some, like, foreseeable future of what these steps would go into by the
Sadra Sabouri: main path of this tree. And then when edit happens, there is another path in this tree that you are branching out into.
Sadra Sabouri: And you can go through these steps again and again. What else I'm thinking of adding is when a user clicks on a state.
Sadra Sabouri: any random state in this node. We should be able to, like, traverse back this path to that specific state.
Sadra Sabouri: step, and show…
Sadra Sabouri: Make able… make user able to, go through all the possible nodes, all the possible states of this computation path, so that he can just, like, go over all possible cases in all possible states, and then
Sadra Sabouri: comparing them. This is…
Sumit Gulwani: So, backtracking can be just done by saving the state, right? You can just use some extra memory there. You don't need… we don't need the agent to be smart enough to be able to backtrack, and we don't want that, right? We want determinism, we want efficiency, predictability, so saving the state there makes sense. Now, for…
Sumit Gulwani: Pulling forward, it is… may not be as simple as…
Sumit Gulwani: Just running the code on the future edges.
Sumit Gulwani: Because what might happen is that those codes on future edges, downstream edges, might have some hard-coded constants.
Sumit Gulwani: And those constants had dependencies.
Sumit Gulwani: Because when the agent wrote this code, it did not think about refactoring it. It went about, you know, step by step, trying to read from the sheet, and write to the sheet, and so on.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah.
Sumit Gulwani: But if this code can be refactored, Internally.
Sumit Gulwani: Then, so let's say you find the same constant, you know, 42 in different code snippets, and then in one of the steps, the user changes that constant 42 to 46.
Sumit Gulwani: Now, you want those changes also to propagate.
Sumit Gulwani: But the best way for those changes to propagate is that when you saw this code snippet which had the constant 42, you lift them up into a variable, and then that variable gets defined the first time it is used, and when the user changes that, you know, it modifies the value of that variable.
Sumit Gulwani: So again, these things are very tricky, messy, you'll have to have… think more about it. The easiest case would be to do just what you're doing, just run the code again.
Sumit Gulwani: So refactoring the code is one thing. The other thing that we can… one can also imagine
Sumit Gulwani: Is that each edge stores not just the office year's code, but also the spec.
Sumit Gulwani: For it.
Sumit Gulwani: And now you can rerun the spec, but this requires use of the model, so this will not be very efficient. But maybe if it is just only a small pathway down, and thus or the bigger computation is on the other side that is not getting affected, then maybe it is still doable. You can run the model again. And one advantage of doing that is that you can also run a different model.
Sumit Gulwani: So the user can also say that, aha.
Sumit Gulwani: you know, this task… so I'll give you examples where I want to run the different models here. So, let's say that I'm trying to do some writing task.
Sumit Gulwani: Now, I feel that… sometimes GPT-5, more often than not, is better at giving me feedback on my writing.
Sumit Gulwani: But Claude is much better at maintaining all my documents inside my file system and referencing previous conversations and pulling off the right details.
Sumit Gulwani: So here, I want to use different models. So maybe, for example, if I were to look at my view, okay, you know, this file got updated a lot, let me look at, you know, what kind of changes were made, and what… looking at the view.
Sumit Gulwani: of the DAG, then I would want to say that, aha, I want to now rerun this step, but let's, you know, use GPT-5, you know, for this particular step. So that may also be a… be a possibility.
Sadra Sabouri: I didn't quite get the expect thing that you said about the steps. What do you mean, exactly?
Sumit Gulwani: So, so each node is now annotated with code.
Sumit Gulwani: And the assumption is that code is the ideal code for the specification that corresponded to it. So the model wanted to do something, and that's the spec.
Sumit Gulwani: And it generated code to do that thing.
Sumit Gulwani: But I might want to do the same thing, but using a different model this time on.
Sumit Gulwani: So, if I have that spec, I can rerun the model.
Sumit Gulwani: A different model to do that.
Sumit Gulwani: Or even the same model, because as I said, the code might be… not be very pure, it might not be refactored properly, so if you just run the code, you might get wrong things. But if you have the spec.
Sumit Gulwani: Then the agent will go and run that spec to regenerate code.
Sadra Sabouri: So it would be, like, something along this explanation thing. Appends a doc, total, roll with some…
Sumit Gulwani: Thank you.
Sadra Sabouri: See?
Sumit Gulwani: And maybe this is similar to what you're also displaying on the screen to the user as to what was done.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So there's these edges that you're trying to show them, these would also contain unexplored pathways?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): The grays are basically the things that they haven't explored, right?
Sadra Sabouri: Grays are the ones that are generated by my agents, and if at any point they want to do exploration.
Sadra Sabouri: That happens by asking for edits.
Sadra Sabouri: And yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): And how are they traversing a path that has… that they hadn't… that they have not seen?
Sadra Sabouri: How, in terms of, like…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): You have, in your… in your graph… basically, what I'm trying to say is, when you're saving these graphs, it only is meaningful for the user if they know what this path is. Like, they wouldn't want to traverse a path that they have never seen.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So, when you're generating, for example, in your picture, you have these two, gray dots on the upper part.
Sadra Sabouri: Yep.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Which seems like the user has never seen these paths.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So that would mean that the user goes back to the node, asks a new question, there is a new path, and, you know, that gets saved, and the previous path gets saved. So when you're saving agent.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): like, pathways, like, whatever the agent generates. Things that the user has not seen should not be in the DAG that the user
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Chem.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): more quick.
Sadra Sabouri: One…
Sumit Gulwani: So let me try to, let me try to answer that, right? Or maybe even give an example over which we can discuss this, and Sather, then you can explain, right? So, one classical scenario of this, you know, that might be, let's say, two different charts.
Sumit Gulwani: So the model ended up making two different charts.
Sumit Gulwani: And it had some, you know, common processing it did, but then it went into this light of generating a pivot table P1 and chart C1, and then pivot table P2 and chart C2.
Sumit Gulwani: And we will always,
Sumit Gulwani: We can record all these intermediate things.
Sumit Gulwani: So that if the user wants to explore any state, we can just, you know, bring that up without having to pay any expensive, you know, computation, or we can run the code again, or whatever it might be.
Sumit Gulwani: But before, Sadra, I need to go and answer, you know, Rini's question, but I'm just putting an example that you can probably use, right? But one other thing I'll say is, a complication that arises is that when the model makes two different charts.
Sumit Gulwani: the layout and theming of Chart 2 was influenced by the layout and theming of Chart 1. Very likely, it should be, so that it is a similar look and feel.
Sumit Gulwani: Now, these are independent paths, And if the user goes and makes one edit, edit to the chart colors.
Sumit Gulwani: It should also get propagated to the other chart.
Sumit Gulwani: And this goes back to this notion of refactoring that I was talking about, you know, refactor the code, and maybe at that point of time, when the user is asking for an edit, you might want to say, oh, do you want to also update the other charts like that?
Sumit Gulwani: So these are the inconsistencies that I see, right? Maybe I have not set up my architecture or system properly, and I'm myself learning as I go and work with these coding agents.
Sumit Gulwani: But the inconsistence that I often see is that there's a lot of dependencies.
Sumit Gulwani: Between different parts of the system project that I'm trying to construct.
Sumit Gulwani: And then when I will give feedback to the model to change one, it does not propagate the changes, and so on, and I have to explicitly ask for it.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah.
Sumit Gulwani: But anyways, we can get back to Rini's question that you can try to answer.
Sadra Sabouri: So let me first, try to answer your question, and then answer Irene's question. I was thinking of that as a same analogy of a Git merge process. So if you want to,
Sadra Sabouri: If you like something from one path, and you like something from another path, and you want to have both of them, when you are in a path, you can ask for merging one node to another node, and then it becomes all the challenges of
Sadra Sabouri: similar challenges that KitMesh has, it could be conflicts. It's not easy, but I'm not… at least for now, I'm trying to, again, scope it down and assume that,
Sadra Sabouri: the dependencies between paths are, not gonna be considered, but, like, syncing them or, like, refactoring them, as you mentioned, might, solve this problem, pre-merge. Like, pre-merge.
Sumit Gulwani: Let's write this thing down, right? Because I feel like this is going to be a big thing in itself. Yeah. Because whenever… how should the user steer it, right? So the question that we are… so two things we are studying in this project, right? How does the user view it, and then steer it, right? And then in the steering part, one of the biggest things is that in a complicated, bigger project, when they steer part of it.
Sumit Gulwani: The dependencies should propagate… the implicit dependencies should propagate, generally speaking, and that is probably a hard thing that we are identifying. So we should absolutely… I think this probably will… will… these are, you know, multiple papers of its own as we… as we go forward. But just… let's just note this down for the future.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, and then for, Renee's question, if I remember…
Sadra Sabouri: if I remember correctly, it was about,
Sadra Sabouri: how these, sorry, can you repeat that for me?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So, let's say you're imagining that every alternate path is an alternative.
Sadra Sabouri: Oh, they…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): graph 1, graph 2, graph 3, graph 4, right? But you're not gonna… that's not gonna be always the case. There might be paths that are rendered
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): irrelevant once you traverse down one other path, right? They're, like, forking decisions. You can go either this way or this way. You cannot go both ways.
Sadra Sabouri: Yep, yep.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So, there should… if you're doing this, then you should only show graphs to the user, which are meaningful based on the decisions that they have made so far. So we need to do something about, like, pruning some of the ages that are no longer relevant.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): If you're showing, for example, the user has made a decision about, for example, only focusing on 2025 profits, and the model has rolled out 2024 profits as a separate path.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): That's… that's, like, it's computation that's not going to be used. Maybe it has already been used, who knows? But that path the user will never explore, so why are we showing it to them?
Sadra Sabouri: So you're saying, once the edit happens, some path gonna be obsolete, right?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, so just like we are refactoring to sync, there has to be one more step of refactoring to ensure that
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Obsolete edges or obsolete nodes are, like, taken out.
Sadra Sabouri: I would say that that's, like, an extra step that a user can let's…
Sadra Sabouri: figure out by his own… when, when he, like, traversed to, to other graphs and, like, see that, like, the… the changes that he likes, already removed, then, it's a, like, decision. Then, like, do you want to end here, or end in the, in the other stuff? But then, like, this is the… I think.
Sadra Sabouri: motivates for the needs for… for marriage manufacturer.
Sadra Sabouri: And yeah, I guess this is… Gonna be…
Sadra Sabouri: I would say out of scope for this.
Sadra Sabouri: This paper, but it's definitely an important thing for this system to have.
Sumit Gulwani: So I learned something new from what, you know, Renny's saying, because I was thinking of something else, I think, but I think this is also valid, so I better appreciate Renny's question now.
Sumit Gulwani: So there can be two kinds of paths here, right? One is the path that comes from the DAG, just the computation that already happened.
Sumit Gulwani: And the other one is what you're talking about are these different alternatives that will lead to, you know… like, even if it was just a straight line of computation, then these alternatives will lead to maybe more possibilities. And I think that's probably what you are showing here, or…
Sadra Sabouri: I think so, yeah.
Sadra Sabouri: Yup.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So does a DAG represent… like, the model's computations, or is the DAG representing, like.
Sumit Gulwani: This is the model's computation, right? So, for example, the model ended up making two different charts.
Sumit Gulwani: And then there was some common… and maybe that the result of the two different charts was combined into maybe, you know, one new, you know, chart, let's say, right? So then the model did something, and then two parts followed of the computation. Well, the model did them in order, but that order is artificial.
Sumit Gulwani: And they could have been done in parallel, and then the results got merged, right? So any computation, I would claim, is a DAG. Any computation that happens at the… so the entire wall of text
Sumit Gulwani: that the model is producing is a DAG.
Sumit Gulwani: It does A, B, C, D, but A, B, C, D, E, you know, don't need to happen in sequential order. Maybe B was dependent upon A, but then C and D were both dependent upon B, and E was dependent upon C and E.
Sumit Gulwani: And that's the clarity we want to give, right? That's what we want the user to be able to quickly see, what all things got computed, and it's not necessarily a sequential order, because a sequence is how the model computed, or agent computed it.
Sumit Gulwani: But what you want to show to the user is the computational dependency between what was done, and that is captured as a DAG.
Sadra Sabouri: And there are actually simpler examples of how these things can get messy, which we actually observed in parts of the formative study. Imagine this editing is adding a new column.
Sadra Sabouri: While you… when you add a new column, then the…
Sadra Sabouri: former path of computation, which was dependent on the former column, changed it, like.
Sadra Sabouri: the new column that has been added messes up every, like, indexing and stuff like this, because it shifts all the columns, like, one right and left. So, like, there are some simpler cases where these different paths… merging these different paths are gonna be complex, but now that I'm speaking, I would say…
Sumit Gulwani: Yeah, but Satra, you know, the complex thing, right? You can always think of, you know, issue an agent there. So now what you're telling the agent is, oh, don't rerun and do that thing, you know, from scratch. I don't want that non-determinism. Anyways, you know, your output is going to be stochastic.
Sumit Gulwani: But the user has already… your user has already seen this thing, but when the user makes this edit, some of this thing, you know, probably gets invalidated. So why don't you try to fix it?
Sumit Gulwani: So even if, let's say, it becomes complicated, right, then the design choices that you have is to completely ignore what was done and restart the computation from that point onwards, but maybe that's not so good. So what you want to consider the agent to do is to, okay, repair, you know, what was done.
Sumit Gulwani: to take into account this change that the user actually wants. And then you run the repaired code after that point.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): It's the same way, like, similar ideas for refactoring as well, right? You can ask the model to understand.
Sumit Gulwani: refactoring.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, whether these changes should be propag… the user's input are something that is generalizable across the paths. If it is, then propagate. If it is not, then…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So you can, you can invoke more.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): calls, basically, asking the model itself to decide.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah.
Sadra Sabouri: I was… I was thinking now that's…
Sadra Sabouri: Let's say here, when edit happens, there could be one
Sadra Sabouri: distinct path. There could be also, as you said, like, one repair path, that the agent also repaired the ongoing path with the new changes, and user can decide whether to go back to the initial path or, like, start the new path fully. So it's like a small merge.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay, this is also doable.
Sumit Gulwani: So there can be different kinds of modes. One mode I can imagine is where the user's time is very precious. They don't care about money, they want to run, you know, the most powerful models, but they want to get the
Sumit Gulwani: precise results and fully steerable and so on. And now, we want to give them the power of full agentic control over even verification, validation. And what we are trying to do is we're trying to figure out the common patterns, right? Through this thought process, through these experiments, we're trying to figure out
Sumit Gulwani: for the mode. And again, there can be different kinds of mode, as I said, but one kind of mode is where latency and cost is not important.
Sumit Gulwani: We just need to work with the user, give them full transparency into what happened, and have them steer it, you know, as easily as they can.
Sadra Sabouri: Yep.
Sumit Gulwani: And this will let you go wild on whatever solutions, or whatever agents you set up for each of the hard tasks that you feel, you know, are getting into the field.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, I think even the merge process can be something that we can ask agents for.
Sumit Gulwani: Exactly right. So just think about it like this. Any problem you run into, any problem, right? Think of, you know, setting up an agent, taking a workflow for it.
Sadra Sabouri: Exactly.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay.
Sadra Sabouri: Yeah, it's fair.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): It will, it will, though, I mean,
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So, Sumit, we were trying out this in a group meeting, where, sort of, we just came up with a problem, and basically, like, go wild, no structured task or anything, we were just trying this out. And at some point, the model started doing things that are not…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Where Sabdra was no longer in control, basically. Like, there was, like, black.
Sumit Gulwani: I did not get it. The model started doing things, that was?
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): That made us realize that Sadra was no longer in control of the whatever is happening to his sheets.
Sadra Sabouri: you bet.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): There was a big black box in the middle, and, you know, things were going… like, columns were being added, and calculations being made which were not asked for. So, we might have to…
Sumit Gulwani: Like, these are the guardrails that we need to set up, right? And that's our opportunity here.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, yeah, we have to carefully do it. Like, for now, go ahead and implement, and then before we run the summative studies, we have to carefully understand what kind of…
Sumit Gulwani: Right? And with these studies, right, there are always two parts. Maybe you just said the same thing, right? One is that we try to learn what the user really wants to do, but even those learnings will evolve as more and more powerful tools get exposed to the users.
Sumit Gulwani: And here, we're not testing our solution, we're just trying to understand the overall process, the workflows that exist today. And the other one is, we are saying, okay, how good our solution is, right? And that's the second thing we study.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah, yeah. This reminds me of something. There is this paper, I don't know, Satra, I think you have read it, Sumit, there's this paper in CHI called The Gulf of Envisioning, which talks about how
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): users have this idea of what a system can do because it's deterministic, but because LLMs are non-deterministic, users cannot have a mental model of what LLMs can do.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): And as a result, they struggle to understand what is the full scope of capabilities, what all… they can even ask the model to do certain things or not.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): And it's constantly evolving, so that's also an additional burden, right? I… today it cannot do this, but tomorrow it can do this, and these kinds of things. So, Satra, the preloaded questions, the Q&A that you have, remember to write this in the paper, that that's one way of sort of giving users
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): an idea of what is the space they can explore with the questions. Like, what are the model's capabilities, and…
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): When we choose the preloaded questions, it's just not random questions, it shows very specific, like, maybe one computational capability and one more general decision-making capability type of question, so they get the flavor of it.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): So, some design that… thoughts that went into the… That part.
Sumit Gulwani: Okay, so I need 5 minutes with Rini, and Athena, do you want to say something? So you have been a bit quiet?
Zeinabsadat Saghi: Yes!
Sumit Gulwani: Thanks a lot for your email, so I will respond to it, I'll find some time, and then we'll… I look forward to your results more, yeah, but any… any thoughts, comments?
Zeinabsadat Saghi: I guess, because Satrav covered most of it, like, everything we mentioned, we work on it, we, like, we discussed together as well.
Zeinabsadat Saghi: But, I definitely agree, like, the graph one is, is a challenging part. I was trying to do something similar for another study, that I was trying to kind of make this graph of reasoning.
Zeinabsadat Saghi: for human thinking process, and I also had this challenge of, like, merging how we can track that
Zeinabsadat Saghi: And, I'm kind of also trying to make it real-time, I think, in both studies. That also makes it more challenging. But I think it works to be, like, a separate paper. It's, like, enough contribution for a separate paper.
Sumit Gulwani: Sounds good, yes, yes. I like this term, graph of reasoning, I've noted it down, it will inspire some.
Zeinabsadat Saghi: Let me talk.
Sumit Gulwani: for me.
Zeinabsadat Saghi: Yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Specifically, she's trying to find gaps in graph of reasoning.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Can we detect graphs when the reasoning graph drifts apart? So, your critical thinking is failing because it's drifting apart, so things like that. So, she's in her own struggle world with all of that, but it's good struggle.
Zeinabsadat Saghi: Yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Yeah.
Souti Chattopadhyay (Rini): Alright guys, carry on, and you have Sujay and all to help out with whatever you need.
Sadra Sabouri: Yep.
Sadra Sabouri: Okay, yeah. I will assign.
Sumit Gulwani: We can stop the transcript recording, and then you folks can leave, and I'll just chat with Ginny for 5 minutes.